---
title: "Optimizing cloud motion estimation on the edge with phase correlation and optical flow"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2023-03-08-optimizing-cloud-motion-estimation-on-the-edge-with-phase-correlation-and-optical-flow
excerpt: 'This paper aims at optimizing cloud motion estimation.'
date: 2023-03-08
venue: 'Atmospheric Measurement Techniques'
paperurl: 'https://amt.copernicus.org/articles/16/1195/2023/'
citation: 'Bhupendra A Raut, et al. (2023). &quot;Optimizing cloud motion estimation on the edge with phase correlation and optical flow.&quot; <i>Atmospheric Measurement Techniques</i>. 16(5).'
---
Phase correlation (PC) is a well-known method for estimating cloud motion vectors (CMVs) from infrared and visible spectrum images. Commonly, phase shift is computed in the small blocks of the images using the fast Fourier transform. In this study, we investigate the performance and the stability of the blockwise PC method by changing the block size, the frame interval, and combinations of red, green, and blue (RGB) channels from the total sky imager (TSI) at the United States Atmospheric Radiation Measurement user facility's Southern Great Plains site. We find that shorter frame intervals, followed by larger block sizes, are responsible for stable estimates of the CMV, as suggested by the higher autocorrelations. The choice of RGB channels has a limited effect on the quality of CMVs, and the red and the grayscale images are marginally more reliable than the other combinations during rapidly evolving low-level clouds. The stability of CMVs was tested at different image resolutions with an implementation of the optimized algorithm on the Sage cyberinfrastructure test bed. We find that doubling the frame rate outperforms quadrupling the image resolution in achieving CMV stability. The correlations of CMVs with the wind data are significant in the range of 0.38–0.59 with a 95 % confidence interval, despite the uncertainties and limitations of both datasets. A comparison of the PC method with constructed data and the optical flow method suggests that the post-processing of the vector field has a significant effect on the quality of the CMV. The raindrop-contaminated images can be identified by the rotation of the TSI mirror in the motion field. The results of this study are critical to optimizing algorithms for edge-computing sensor systems.
